(upbeat music)
- Well, welcome to the Get Fit with Jodell podcast.
It's time once again for Dr. Ray Pete.
He's joined me and is always so gracious with his time.
And I could go on and on about his laundry list
of credentials and how long he's been teaching
and researching nutrition,
in addition to authoring many books and publications,
longer than many of us have been alive.
And that's what makes him what I consider
to be one of the leading authorities in nutrition
and more specifically, women's hormonal health.
So Dr. Pete, thank you, thank you,
thank you so much for coming back.
How are you?
- Very well.
- Awesome.
Well, before we get started with this great lineup
of questions that so many of our listeners
have put together for you,
I wanted to ask you kind of some rapid fire questions
about yourself,
just so the audience can learn who Ray Pete is.
So these are just a few that popped off the top of my head
that I thought I'd ask you.
So the first one is your favorite food.
- Depends on whether it's for practicality or for taste.
Why the deliciousness of a food?
Probably things like cheese,
grilled cheese sandwich,
or huevos trancheros, Mexican style.
But for practicality, any kind of cheese,
and milk, those are my basic staples.
- Okay, favorite animal.
- Oh, ants, I think.
- Really?
Okay, I have to ask why.
- They're intelligent and they aren't as,
well, bees and wasps are equally intelligent,
but they tend to outsmart me.
And I can deal with ants and reason with them.
- I love that.
Okay, so since you paint, how about your favorite artist?
- I, it has generally been red wire,
just because I like my manner of painting
sort of assimilates his,
all of his different styles seem comfortable for me.
- How about your favorite place that you've ever visited?
- Um, probably some spots in the triangle of Mexico.
- Oh, and how about someone you admire?
- I have, most of them have died basically by the end.
Ralph Nader is a living person that I admire.
- And how about someone who has passed on that you admire?
- Albert Centrochi, William Blake,
a whole line of philosophers, biologists,
educators, mostly descenders and very outside
the culture of thinkers.
- I'm so glad you mentioned Albert St. Georgie
because I actually had a question that I wanted to ask you.
Since you tend to talk thyroid a lot,
I wanted to know your thoughts on iodine supplementation
and I had read something about Albert St. Georgie
with iodine.
What are your thoughts?
And the reason I had looked it up was I've read
and researched that it can be protective against 5G
and wanted to know how you feel about it.
- I have noticed that Centrochi has been misquoted
on iodine in one of his books.
He gives a little jingle about iodine
but his work didn't do anything special
about iodine, he was very conscious of the electronic
behavior of iodine in cells.
And his metabolic work was all around oxidation
and what electrons are doing in cells.
And very slight excess of iodine can disrupt the function
of the thyroid gland as well as the cellular handling
of electrons and oxygen.
So it's a very touchy thing to supplement.
And there are cults, D. Abraham, or Guy Abraham,
he happened to study in the same lab and department
that I did for my PhD, so I had brief contact with him
but he announced that he was the world's expert in iodine
and then he advocated taking 10 milligrams a day
or even more and he got two medical doctor followers
to continue at his tradition but essentially
he was mentally cracked on the subject
and totally anti-scientific so I think he started
a very dangerous tradition in which people think
it's safe to take 10 milligrams of iodine per day.
- Well I'm so glad I asked you about that
'cause one of his publications was one I came across.
So you wouldn't be a fan of any sort of iodine supplementation
even in small doses?
- Even iodized salt, I have a collection of,
I think it's 72 articles on the long range effects
of adding iodine to salt over the last several decades
and even approximately doubling the normal amount
of iodine, the minimal amount is safe
but definitely half a milligram of iodine per day extra
over the long run causes thyroid glandular damage.
- And so it is important for the thyroid to have iodine
but you might suggest that we just get it through
what food we take in or food from the seeds.
- Yeah, for example, cows can give milk
if they're deficient in iodine, the thyroid is essential
for reproductive functions and so eggs and milk
are guaranteed to contain adequate iodine
and there was a study in the 60s that found that Americans,
almost every American eating a standard diet
had a great excess of iodine in their diet
and at that time it was coming from bread, iodine
was used as a coal conditioner.
- Okay, very good, that's what I wanted to know
so always glad I can ask you these things.
Okay, we're gonna jump into the question queue here
and thank you guys, everybody that submitted questions,
you guys are super fun whenever I post a thing about
I'm gonna interview Dr. Pete, you're quick to respond
and send in your questions so just look for those posts
on YouTube every now and then and you'll be able
to ask Dr. Pete anything you want.
Mike is our first one here, Mike's up and he says,
can you ask Dr. Pete about how to safely build muscle mass
using weights and if a calorie surplus is needed
and then a sample diet for dropping body fat?
- Anything that helps you build muscle helps you lose fat
because muscle is where most of our calories
are oxidized, just passively sitting your muscles
for almost pure fat so having big muscles
and sitting around all day, you won't get fat
if you eat the right amount of calories for your activity.
And the Eastern Europeans in the 1960s
kept being accused of doping with testosterone
because they're athletes, both men and women
have higher testosterone levels very consistently
over Americans and their secret,
I guess some of them did dope with testosterone
but their method of training caused their bodies
to naturally increase ratio of testosterone to cortisol.
The muscle tissue shrinks under the influence of cortisol
and grows under the influence of testosterone
so it's a constant balance
and if a person is under stress,
there are little bit of testosterone
that the body can manage to produce.
It binds to the heart, lungs and brain.
The heart muscle is powerfully protected by testosterone
and it happens that these hormones are metabolized.
Every cell that has been studied in the right circumstance
turns out to be able to create steroids.
The skin is one of our major steroid forming organisms.
It can even produce the pituitary hormones
needed to stimulate its own production of steroids
and muscle cells can produce testosterone
and if they are not stressed,
the right amount of exertion,
especially concentric contraction
contracting against resistance
shifts the balance towards actually producing
some testosterone locally
as well as responding to testosterone
and blocking cortisol shrinking effect
but if the cell reaches the level of activity
that it can't gain enough oxygen from the blood,
then it begins producing lactic acid
and at that point, it shifts over
to actually producing some internal cortisol
with the whole body system
under the influence of lactic acid
shifts into the stress mode
and so the Eastern Europeans have found
that if the trainer would watch
for the point at which lactic acid began to form
and made the athletes stop training,
it always seems far too early for the athletes
but when the trainer made them stop training so much,
then their performance went tremendously higher.
- I love that, that's kind of a strategy
that I sometimes employ with my clients
when I train them is let me just get you right
to the brink of where that lactic acid starts coming in
and then shut it down.
So that's pretty cool to know
that other trainers in Europe are doing that.
So as far as like a sample diet,
what would you recommend for Mike?
- Making sure that you get enough calcium
and vitamin T, which lots of doctors will think
that sounds very silly but catechzia or sarcopenia
under stress or cancer or aging or hypothyroidism
an extreme if a person has the thyroid gland removed
and doesn't have a supplement,
they experience catechzia, the muscles waste away
because thyroid hormone is our first anabolic hormone.
It activates muscle growth, everything else being adequate
and to do that, it produces energy efficiently
resulting in carbon dioxide adequate to be a barrier.
The more carbon dioxide you have the more completely
you suppress glycolysis and lactic acid formation.
So you can exert more to the extent
that you can produce a corresponding amount
of carbon dioxide.
It's carbon dioxide that holds down the lactic production.
And so if you're deficient in calcium and vitamin G,
your parathyroid hormone increases
to draw calcium out of your bones and parathyroid hormone
is a powerful anti-mitochondrial, it suppresses
the formation of carbon dioxide in production of energy.
So a calcium and vitamin D deficiency
is its first step towards wasting of your muscles.
- Yeah, we definitely don't want that.
So that's really good recommendation
to keep that calcium and vitamin D rich foods going.
Okay, Karen asks, I take MSM and glutathione
to help with the fact that my naturopath
says I don't handle sulfur well.
How does one begin to start handling sulfur well
and are you a fan of MSM and glutathione?
- Definitely not, glutathione is, in itself,
it's electronically reducing.
It tends to donate electrons like ascorbic acid
is a reducing agent and sulfur compounds
are commonly reducing agents.
But the whole established biochemical
even still what most biochemistry professors
are teaching a mistaken idea of how
the balance of reducing and oxidizing works in the body.
Glutathione in the stable oxidizing state of the cell
is oxidized into the disulfide form.
It's an SS bond rather than an SH bond.
Ascorbic acid inside the healthy cell
exists as dehydroascorbate.
That's why you can cure scurvy very easily by eating meat
even though you can't find any measurable
ascorbic acid that they speak of in meat.
If you eat it, you get an abundance
of ascorbic acid released because it has a lot
of the material in the oxidized form as dehydroascorbate.
And it works in that form inside the cell.
Ascorbic acid is working as an oxidant
and one of the first things it oxidizes
is glutathione to put it into the disulfide form.
And that blocks proteins into a stable
anti-stress configuration.
When the cell is stressed, injured,
reduced alcohol poisoning, estrogen excess,
anything that injuries it and causes it
to go into a cell division mode
causes a tremendous explosion all through the cell
of measurable glutathione which wasn't there
in the resting condition because the dehydroascorbate
was keeping it oxidized.
And if you happen to eat a reducing agent
like glutathione or vitamin C in the presence
of even a trace amount of copper or iron
or other oxidizing metal, just a trace of those metals
will cause tremendous free radical formation
and damage from the reducing power of ascorbic acid
or NADH or glutathione.
Those things should be produced inside the cell
only in response to stress and if you eat them as such,
then they're very potentially toxic.
- Okay, and then how would she go about starting
to handle sulfur well?
'Cause it sounds like she doesn't handle sulfur rich foods
and she wants to be able to.
- The trace elements and vitamins are making sure
that you're well nourished for trace elements.
For example, eating fish or other seafoods from the ocean,
one meal of that a week will provide selenium
and other minerals and having eggs every day
will provide not only an abundance of the sulfur amino acids
but also a good balance of the vitamins you need
for metabolizing them.
- Okay, and then we have Naomi and she was curious about,
she heard that you use hydrogenated coconut oil
instead of cold pressed and she wanted to know why.
- The filtration is one thing.
The so-called virgin coconut oil,
sometimes it has a delicious flavor
which is great for making ice cream.
Using no cream at all but an egg
to emulsify the unfiltered coconut oil,
you get a delicious, fresh coconut tasting ice cream.
So it's good for flavoring or making cookies or something
but it's a staple.
Those unfiltered flavorful things contain enzymes
that can break down the fats and lead to rancidity
but there are also a lot of allergenic materials
and quite a few people have a bad reaction
to unfiltered or poorly filtered coconut oil
and in the process of solidifying it by hydrogenation
they always start with a very well-filtered oil
and then ordinary coconut oil contains around 3%
of the polyunsaturated fatty acids
and the small percentage of the Puffa
is what makes coconut oil so much safer
than other vegetable oils
but still that 3% over a lifetime
that those tenders get stored in your tissues
and proceed to their toxic effects
so for total avoidance as far as possible.
If I could find a safely hydrated vitinizer butter,
I think I would do that but the process
would destroy the good flavor of butter
which is its main value.
- Yeah and I have clients that they wanna fry their eggs
and they would go grab the most expensive
unrefined cold-pressed virgin coconut oil
and they're like my eggs taste like suntan lotion
and that's why I said yeah, it's just fine to do the refined,
the cheapest coconut oil, you can find the hydrogenated
just fine because then you also won't have
that coconut flavor in there.
You're just gonna have the nice oil to fry in.
- Yeah and you can mix butter and hydrated coconut oil
and you still get the butter flavor.
- Good, okay, so the next name is a little hard
to pronounce, UPCAR, UPCAR is the name, UPCAR become,
says, can my wife who's 51 years of age
take sal palmetto for falling hair?
Secondly, can sal palmetto act as pregnant alone in the body?
- It does have some of those actions
but I've never actually seen any good things
that benefits from it.
I've been watching because of that analogous steroid effect,
it theoretically should have some
but I've just never known anyone
to have noticeable results from it.
- Okay, all right, Kathleen has a couple questions here.
She asks, can you ask Dr. Pete what about oxalates?
What about salicylates?
And then also liver detox, specifically glucuronidation
for salicylates.
Why does some have hypoglycemia from fruit?
And then we'll go to a couple more she has after that
but first your thoughts on oxalates and salicylates
and glucuronidation.
- Three very separate issues.
Our body can oxidize oxalic acid.
It isn't necessarily a problem in moderate amounts
but it can bind up minerals.
So if you eat it in any quantity,
it could steal magnesium, for example, from your diet.
So it definitely isn't a good food diet
that you've put in a very small amounts.
Plants that have a lot of it
can actually take calcium out of your cheese.
So I tend to avoid the foods that contain it
just because of their damaging effect
on magnesium and calcium metabolism.
And salicylates, the term is very misleadingly misused.
Willowbark and the very few other plants
actually contain salicylic acid
or actual aspirin, acetyl salicylate.
But people are using it for basically anything
with the benzene range structure.
And that includes almost everything living.
And that has led to a kind of culty sphere of fruit.
And the same range of molecules
contains the incredibly beneficial flavonoid family.
Those are often called salicylates
but they have little to do with salicylate,
as you can imagine.
But they have very far ranging anti-oxidant effects
and the anti-toxic.
Very important substances.
That's one of the reasons I advocate drinking orange juice
as far as you can get a good tasting sweet orange juice
without very much citric acid
because citric acid is another thing
that damages your cheese and in large amounts citric acid
even though it enters the citric acid cycle
and can be oxidized.
It's another one of those things
that is perfectly healthy in its place.
But when you eat it,
that isn't its proper place in metabolism.
And when it's out of its normal place in the system,
then it has the potential to be toxic.
But fruits, guavas and oranges
are among the highest in these flavonoid protective agents
and they like ascorbic acid inside the cell
even though they're considered anti-oxidants
inside the cell their beneficial effect
is because they act as catalysts to oxidation
like dehydroascorbate does
are tending to keep the cell out of reducing stress.
- I'm so glad you said that about fruit
because I have a hard time believing
that something that was intended by a creator in nature
to assist us in our health would be inappropriate.
Like if it's unadulterated found in nature,
if we had to live off the land,
it would be the perfect food
since it has everything, you don't have to cook it.
You don't have to salt it.
You don't have to do anything.
You take a fruit and you eat it.
It's nature's perfect vision.
- The squirrel monkey is notoriously long lives for its size.
A squirrel lives maybe eight or 10 years or something,
but the squirrel monkey of the same size
lives about 30 years, very unusual for an animal that small
and its diet in nature consists purely of fruit
and it also has one of the biggest brain to body ratios
and index of intelligence of all animals.
That demonstrates the power of fruit nutritionally.
Fruit and pelicans are safest natural foods.
- And she asks about estrogen and calcium deglucrate.
So would this be helpful for lowering estrogen?
What do you think about calcium deglucrate?
- That has been advocated for an anti-estrogen treatment
and an anti-cancer treatment.
And it probably has benefit.
Logically, glucuronidation is a fundamental way
that we rid the body of estrogen.
100% of estrogen should be excreted and not recycled
when the liver is exposed to it,
it should be immediately annihilated
by a testing glucuronic acid or sulfuric acid to it.
But when something damages the liver's metabolic rate
such as hypothyroidism, then the liver can allow
all of the estrogen that it receives to pass through
unmodified and that becomes carcinogenic
and produces PMS and epilepsy and all of the consequences.
And thyroid hormone and good nutrition are the things
that activate glucuronidation and sulfotransferase.
So if you're ready to play a supplement like that,
should add some raw material needed for the process.
- Yeah, and the fruits that you mentioned,
the guava and the oranges and things like that,
they actually help to pull excess estrogen out of the body.
So I mean, yeah, going back to the fruit along with that
is going to be really good for that individual as well.
Natasha asks about spider veins.
So she says, although I suspect he'll mention copper
and also the best solutions for a safe deodorant.
- Solutions for what was the last word?
- So the first part is about spider veins
and then the second part is about a safe deodorant.
- Oh, deodorant, oh.
Washing regularly is the safest deodorant.
- Deodorant, but if there's a bacteria growing there
or a fungus, a safe antiseptic like sulfur soap,
one bath using 10% sulfur soap will sometimes
permanently eliminate an underarm odor problem
by destroying the microorganism that's causing
the fat material to break down.
Spider veins traditionally have been associated with
chronic unopposed estrogen and what they're apparently
developing in response to is some kind of an oxygen delivery
problem in that area of tissue and things that improve
oxygenation, vitamin K has been used topically.
It's in principle, it could help,
but I don't know how effective,
but progesterone systemically or topically
and especially thyroid to help you excrete estrogen.
Those are things that traditionally worked.
- So yeah, it is more of an estrogen dominant thing
that she would be having the spider veins?
Okay, all right, Jesse asks, what is the best way
to reduce bowel inflammation in cases
where one is already addressing thyroid issues
and using dietary therapies such as eating carrot salads,
bamboo shoots, eggshell powder, and OJ,
so reducing bowel inflammation?
- Some people find that the particle size
of eggshell powder to be a problem.
You might experiment using maybe a coffee grinder
that can reduce it to the fineness of the talcum powder
and then take it with food and trying a different brand
of orange juice, I've found that some brands
that I have used, for example, a frozen orange juice
concentrate used for years, pulp-free so-called.
I noticed that it started causing intense,
intestinal inflammation and it also started leaving
a residue of gummy material on the glass after I drank it.
So I changed brands and found one that was truly pulp-free
and had no more inflammation.
And sometimes a supplement is a villain.
Vitamin B supplement, a scarpic acid, tablets,
many of the most popular supplements
cause horrible inflammation to the intestine.
- A lot of people use a glutamine for the intestines,
like for leaky gut, what do you think about that?
- Any of the manufactured so-called pure chemicals
are risky because in the manufacturing process,
every stage that goes through, it can pick up
some foreign material and trace them out.
And all it takes for an allergic reaction
is a trace analysis would almost always be invisible.
It would take an ultra-fine analysis
to guarantee the purity of something like glutamine
or glutathione or any of the things sold as pure chemicals.
- Alrighty, Amanda asks, what can one do
for histamine mast cell issues?
I've had a spot on my foot for the longest time
that will just not stop itching,
usually when warm from wearing shoes.
It used to blister and contain clear liquid
that has stopped after a few months
following Ray Pete's protocols.
I'm about a year and a half in now.
I was originally diagnosed with a form of eczema.
I've also discovered I have issues with vibration
using a percussion massager.
So I was told it was due to high histamine levels.
Is that true and what can I do?
- Estrogen is the main promoter
of overproduction of mast cells and histamine.
Once you get an inflamed area in any part of the body,
a place you have had a mosquito bite, for example,
mast cells can move in and live forever
the rest of your life as a potential site of inflammation.
The local anesthetics happen to be,
as far as I know, all of them are functional antihistamines.
And so treating the itchy spot with enodril
or benzocaine ointment or lidocaine ointment,
any of those things that stops the itching momentarily
can have a long range therapeutic effect
because it's interfering with the histamine production
and in a way training the mast cells
to become more stable.
- Okay, that's good, I like that.
I've never thought about it that way before.
Person known as I love sugar,
I think they've asked questions before.
Thank you for your question.
He asks, please ask Dr. Pete.
I read some research that copper supplement absorption
is drastically down regulated above two milligrams a day.
I don't have adequate access to copper rich foods
other than liver.
Does Dr. Pete think that eating liver weekly,
three to four ounces,
would still cover the RDA requirements for the whole week?
I have orange calluses and is there a way to use the liver
as a copper supplement without risking vitamin A excess?
- Thyroid hormone is probably the major regulator
of copper absorption and metabolism
because the crucial oxidizing enzyme
that thyroid activates as cytochrome C oxidase
is a copper containing enzyme.
And so,
increasing your thyroid function
increases your ability to absorb and use copper.
- Good, okay, moving right along.
Jimmy asks, what biomarkers to keep track of for longevity?
So what biomarkers would you recommend
that we keep track of for longevity purposes?
- Keeping your lactic acid low under carbon dioxide high.
For over a hundred years,
insurance companies have known that people living
in very high altitude cities,
in the Andes, for example, or the Himalayas,
these people typically are about 10% lower
than the world average
in all of the degenerative diseases
at dementia, cancer, and heart disease.
And even the altitude differences within New Mexico,
which are very moderate compared to the Andes and Himalayas,
have showed the same reduction of degenerative disease.
And what happens at high altitude is
the lungs are allowed because there is less oxygen.
The lungs are able to retain
a much higher level of carbon dioxide.
And that carbon dioxide retention,
when you're adapted to high altitude,
the carbon dioxide powerfully suppresses
lactic acid production.
That has been called the lactate paradox of altitude,
because you can exercise very intensely
and not produce nearly as much lactic acid
as you would with the same amount of activity at sea level.
And so lactic acid down, carbon dioxide up,
are the most powerful indicators
of good health in one life.
- Okay, we are sailing right through these,
but we've got a ways to go,
so we'll just have to stop at some point,
but I'm gonna keep going with a few more here.
So if we don't get to your question,
we'll get to it on the next call, I promise.
Luke asks, how does someone become allergic to pork
and what to do about it?
- I think stopping at eating pork
is the easiest and possibly the only solution.
But you can reduce all of your food sensitivities
by keeping your glucose metabolism optimal.
And the three things for a normalizer
and maintaining good glucose oxidation
are thyroid, calcium intake, and vitamin D.
One of Hans Seljes associates did some very good studies
on animals, showing that food, he arranged allergens
from an allergen that would cause very quick death
down to one that would cause sniffles
in the experimental rats.
And then he adjusted, he would give them a little insulin
to lower their blood sugar by 50%.
And he found that the mild allergen
that normally cause sniffles could kill them
when their blood sugar was just 50% lower than normal.
But then he infused glucose,
arranged their glucose to 300 milligrams,
percent about three times normal.
And even the deadly allergens with the high glucose
produced only the mild sniffles.
So your glucose metabolism is almost always
the most powerful factor.
Behind those sensitivities and behind the glucose problem,
it's usually calcium, vitamin D, and thyroid
keeping down the toxic hormone such as parathyroid hormone
and angiotensin and albasterone and estrogen and so on.
- Yeah, I wanna talk more about angiotensin
in one of our next podcast
'cause I want to pick your brain about that.
Turkish Postman asks, and this is a really good question,
it's kind of personal towards you, Dr. Pete,
but it is a really good question.
What would Dr. Pete do if he had been diagnosed with cancer?
- Several times, about 45 or 50 years ago,
two or three doctors were sure I had
at least a pre-cancerous condition.
And since I had studied what cancerologists
and oncologists do when they, biopsy at least,
diagnosed with cancer, I had no intention at all
of having a specialist confirm that it was even pre-cancerous
because I knew I had absolutely confidence
that the treatments were more harmful than the disease.
So in the first case for what was apparently leukoplakia,
I had increased my vitamin A intake tremendously.
And within a week, it had disappeared.
And I realized I had experienced that previously in the past
and that it was probably accidentally increasing
my vitamin A that caused it to disappear.
So I, the last time I was diagnosed with cancer,
the leukoplakia of the mouth is essentially similar
to what has been diagnosed as a pre-cancerous uterine
condition on the cervix.
And so I told some women about my experience
and they found the same thing.
They're supposedly pre-cancerous cervical condition
within a month went back to normal.
And in the other case, a doctor, I had my shirt off
and a doctor, actually two different individuals
at different times said that really looks
like a dangerous melanoma, you should have it checked.
And I have been watching it with anxiety
at its rapid deformed growth.
But I happened to just start experimenting
just for other reasons.
I was interested in what DHEA would do,
especially combined with progesterone.
I was taking a small amounts of those
just about the time that the doctor made the comment.
And about three or four days later, I looked down
and it looked like I had a maraschino cherry on my belly
where the ugly melanoma had grown about 10 fold
over the last few months and was becoming a very deformed
looking but suddenly it was a maraschino cherry.
And there was a bit of black on it.
I thought it looked like possibly a giant tick
inflating with blood but I knew I had touched it
and the black stuff just fell off,
leaving a little blood drop.
And over the next couple of days,
that glossy red globe shrank away
and it revealed the little brown moles that I had had
in that spot all my life
until the big black things started growing.
And so over the next 40 years,
every time something would pop up looking
at like developing skin cancer,
even to the point of having a bloody spot on it,
I would take a little bit
of either of those PHEA or progesterone orally
or I would, I found that if I rubbed it into the skin,
keeping it about an inch away
so that the vitamin E didn't irritate
that already irritated area,
that the thing looking like a melanoma
would simply go away and return to absolutely normal tissue.
And one growth that was the size of a jumble ollie
that had come up in just a matter of over about a month.
And within two weeks of this increase of PHEA
and progesterone, the whole thing had shriveled away
and didn't even leave a scar.
And I've had internal symptoms
that I suspected were similar processes,
polyps, and so on.
And I've always simply ignored them.
The history of prostate cancer treatment
as the treatment was refined
through the middle of the last century,
prostate cancer mortality continued to increase.
In the 1980s, the prostate specific antigen was discovered
and used as a sign that they could give earlier treatment
by identifying cancer earlier.
And in the early 90s, using the PSA
to find cancer at an early stage,
not only the diagnosis of prostate cancer increased.
At that time, the main treatments were
usually systemic estrogen,
even if prostate surgery
was used to radically remove the gland,
the person would usually get large doses of estrogen.
But there was this surge of approximately 50% more cancers
than I had noticed, but the death rate
from prostate cancer surged similarly,
about a 50% increase in the short time
of deaths from prostate cancer.
That led to a backing off.
And there was a survey of people who specialized
in neurological cancers.
They were asked the people with a lot of experience
in treating prostate cancer,
they were asked what they would do
if they were diagnosed with prostate cancer.
And the great majority of them said nothing
because they had seen that the treatments
caused earlier deaths rather than later.
And that led to the policy of what they called
one full weighting.
And if you look at the very few studies,
starting in the '50s,
in which they actually compared doing nothing
to the quicker treatment and usually surgery,
radiation, and chemotherapy,
people lived much longer who did nothing.
So as far as the evidence exists,
it implies that doing nothing
is going to be life extending.
- I completely agree.
My own mom was diagnosed with stomach cancer
and was given a 5% chance of living for two to five years.
And after taking the traditional treatment,
the chemo and radiation, she lived one year.
So had she done nothing, she could have lived longer
just dealing with the fact that she had trouble swallowing.
And so it's interesting, as you say,
I think if we would think more about giving the body
the proper conditions to repair,
it will do so rather than jumping to the Band-Aid solution.
So yeah, I love that you've experienced it
to be what you know is cancer within you,
but yet you chose to just provide the body
with what it needed, novel idea.
So do you have time for a couple more?
We're almost towards the end here.
We'll only have a couple of people
that don't get their questions answered
and we'll put them in the queue for next time.
So this next one is from EpicKiller30.
"What is the cause of excess saliva?"
And I really like the second part of his questions.
I'm curious about this.
And the common cause of high serotonin in children.
- And the last question.
- The most common cause for high serotonin in children.
- In children was the last word?
- Yes, yes, mm-hmm.
- The intestine produces 95% of the body's serotonin
and the glands, such as the salivary gland,
are very responsive to the composition of the blood.
The blood picks up essentially all of the serotonin
produced in the intestine, a really large amount of it.
And the platelets bind it and carry it to the lungs
as long as there is carbon dioxide adequate in the blood.
The platelets are able to firmly hold the serotonin
so the tissues don't experience the serotonin at all
as it passes through the bloodstream heading for the lungs.
And the surge of oxygen and the sudden loss
of carbon dioxide causes the platelets
to release the serotonin.
And the serotonin runs into lung enzymes that destroy it.
And in experiments, if you're monitoring their capillaries,
you can see the size of the capillary
and whether it's being obstructed.
If a person hyperventilates and loses too much carbon dioxide
all through the body, the platelets become unable
to hang onto the carbon dioxide until it reaches the lungs,
unable to hang onto the serotonin until they reach the lungs.
So they release the serotonin indiscriminately
in the bloodstream and that causes capillaries
wherever the serotonin is released from capillaries.
It causes constriction of the capillaries
combined with edema, swelling of the wall of the capillary
and surrounding tissues and leakiness of the capillary.
So a very bad condition can be set up in the whole body
just by hyperventilating enough to lower the CO2
and to interrupt the platelets function
of getting rid of the serotonin.
And anything that makes you tend to not produce
enough carbon dioxide, hypothyroidism, for example,
leads to what amounts to hyperventilation
because you don't have enough CO2 being produced.
So the lactic acid comes up throughout your system
and so that can cause the equivalent
of serotonin poisoning everywhere.
And the parasympathetic nervous overactivity
is known to cause excessive salivation,
but something like a systemic imbalance of the regulation
of both the platelets and mast cells could contribute to it.
- Okay, very good.
Okay, final question here, DPS0404 is the name
and they ask any helpful suggestions for reversing,
dissolving the very beginning stages of cataracts?
- The actual event happening surprisingly,
substance becomes stiffer but actually experience
the kind of cellular edema that's the opaque area
of a cataract is whether has a higher water content
than the normal transparent regions
and estrogen or lack of oxygen is one of the things
that can add to this unnatural uptake of water
and caffeine and the stabilizing steroids
everything from cholesterol, true pregnenolone
and progesterone, all of these things help offset
that over hydrating effect that stress has.
So increasing the B vitamins,
making sure you're producing enough cholesterol
and have enough fibroid that you can convert the cholesterol
to the protective hormones.
I think that's the basic way to retard the formation.
I've known two or three people.
My brother was one of them when he was about 65,
his optometrist said he had cataracts starting
about 10 years later, he had another exam
and asked about the cataracts.
And the doctor said, you could see where they had been
but there was no functional cataract left.
And he had just been slightly improving his diet,
not nearly enough calcium and vitamin G
but made some improvements.
- Yes, once again, I think if you give the body
the proper conditions, it can do wondrous things.
So that's what I appreciate about you
is that you seem to know quite a bit
about how to help us give it the proper conditions.
So all right, that wraps it up for today, Dr. Pete.
You've been so helpful and I'm so thankful for you
that we can do this and I look forward to the next one.
We already have some questions in the queue for the next time.
So where can people find out about you
and read more of these awesome publications
you were mentioning earlier as well as taking an order
for your newsletter, which I highly recommend.
- My website is repeat.com.
And the newsletter information is at repeatnewsletter.
It has an S in it, no apostrophe, at gmail.com.
- Yeah, and I will have that in the show notes as well.
Thank you, Dr. Pete.
Once again, I always love this with you.
So we will reconvene again soon.
- Okay, thanks.
- All right, thanks everybody.
Bye for now.
(upbeat music)
- Parabola code time.
You know what?
ATP science products are some of the best supplements
on the market to date that I have used personally
and recommended to my nutrition clients for years.
They were developed by a naturopathic doctor
and he's meticulous about handcrafted ingredients.
So here's some of my favorite products.
The hydrolyzed no-way collagen protein powder is delectable.
The Alpha Prime product helped regulate my hormones
after toxic mold exposure.
And the CordRX product helped immensely
with regulating my cortisol and sleep.
And I cannot say enough about their topical rubs,
Subcut, and my personal favorite, the Block E3.
So Block E3 is actually really great
for blocking harmful estrogen just underneath the skin
and preventing that buildup of cellulite
and kind of the lumpy bumpies.
So I've got a promo code for you
for their website atpscience.com.
You get 10% off site-wide
and they have quite a few amazing products.
You're gonna use coupon code JODEL.
That's J-O-D-E-L-L-E to save 10% today on atpscience.com.
Go there right now and get your products.
I'm like a librarian. (chuckles)
Come in, come into my library.
Don't mind the excessive blue light
'cause I have blue blockers for you.
Oh, there's some sort of schwartz on this one.
So with so many options on the Swanwick website,
I thought I'd show you some of the different fits
and show you just how cool blocking blue light can be
and stylish at the same time.
My favorite are actually the cat eyes.
So I like those the best.
Like I could like go to a sock hop. (chuckles)
(mumbles)
So it's cool.
You can actually be stylish
and be blocking the blue light at the same time
with Swanwick sleep glasses or schwartz as they're called.
Now, not just for adults, okay?
So here I have little, my daughter's little blue blockers.
Obviously they're gonna be a little small on me.
In case you want them in blue or pink,
they also have pink on the website.
She likes her purple ones.
So I think if I really wanted to, whoops, I dropped on.
If I really wanted to get the benefit of blocking
as much blue light as possible, simply.
Okay, I think that's really gonna do it as far as, yeah, okay.
So there you have options.
Now these here, these are the fit overs that fit over.
Like when I wear my glasses,
I'll put these on and they fit over.
So for people that wear glasses, there's that option.
Then for people that are looking for daylight blocking,
we have the day blockers in the black.
But if you don't want the black,
then you have the two tone.
So there's those.
Can you tell I have a little bit of an addiction
to blue blockers? (chuckles)
So while I was making the video, I forgot I had these too.
So these are kind of like the clear way fares.
So I literally have, okay, one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, seven, eight, well, eight, nine pairs
if you count my daughter's two. (chuckles)
I have an issue.
swanmuxleep.com, GetFit is the code G-E-T-F-I-T
to save 10% of time for a pair that works for you.
What are you gonna pick?
Post below and let me know.
(upbeat music)